# The Behavioural ecology of the Banded Dotterel

## Project description

-   MEDIA REQUEST @mihai: I'd love it if this video would play in a banner format automatically from the Google Drive link: <https://drive.google.com/file/d/1F1_YANs2z6siFitAOQpSGBCgQ_1OtnXl>. For example see this website with a video playing in a banner format automatically: <https://www.ucsc.edu/>

The configuration of the continents and the ecosystems they harbour serve as the selective landscapes on which all aspects of animal migration evolve. Northern Hemisphere breeding birds commonly exhibit inter-continental and trans-hemispheric migration, whereas no land-birds breeding in the Southern Hemisphere exhibit inter-continental migration and only a few cross the Equator. Recent evidence revealed that austral migrants have responded differently to contemporary climate change than their boreal counterparts: post-breeding migratory schedules of austral birds have gradually delayed, whereas they have advanced for boreal migrants. How do migratory strategies adapt to shifting climates – via individual plasticity or via demographic processes of geneflow and phenotypic extinction? Our investigations aim to elucidate the adaptive potential of bird migration in an austral context by focusing on the Banded Dotterel (*Charadrius bicinctus*), a shorebird with extreme phenotypic diversity in seasonal movements throughout the south-west Pacific: some individuals stay sedentary year-round at New Zealand nesting sites, while other individuals exhibit one of the longest known trans-oceanic migrations in the Southern Hemisphere. Our endeavour bridges high-tech animal tacking instrumentation with high-throughput genomic sequencing to contrast contemporary phenotypic landscapes of migratory heterogeneity with demographic reconstructions of spatial variation in ancient migration patterns. Our team also utilizes a 50-year longitudinal dataset to quantify the survival and reproductive trade-offs of various migratory phenotypes, and forecast demographic shifts in these phenotypes under future climate scenarios. Altogether our investigation bridges crucial gaps in migration theory and broadens our understanding of phenotypic flexibility during the Anthropocene.

The region inhabited by the Banded Dotterel in the south-west Pacific is a microcosm for evolutionary adaptation, unrivalled anywhere on Earth: New Zealand’s biogeography has been intimately shaped by the interactive forces of the region’s ancient volcanic activity, seismic uplift, and climate-induced glacial and sea-level dynamics. Our research aims to understand how the evolutionary causes and consequences of the Banded Dotterel's variable migratory strategies in the context of shifting climates. The Banded Dotterel’s evolutionary origin story presents a textbook example of how global-scale abiotic forces have interacted to shape its contemporary distribution and variable migratory tendencies. Phylogenetics reveal that the Banded Dotterel’s founding ancestor likely dispersed to New Zealand from Australia during the mid-Miocene, an epoch distinguished by global temperatures 5°C warmer than today, low sea levels, and intense volcanic activity. The Banded Dotterel speciated during the Pliocene, during which the South Island’s Southern Alps were formed – giving rise to stark seasonal contrasts between mountain and coastal habitats. During the Last Glacial Maxima (LGM), the South Island was covered by a massive ice sheet, restricting dotterel breeding habitats to the coast and likely enforcing obligatory migration due to harsh winter severity. Genomic-based demographic reconstructions of flightless endemics of New Zealand, such as the Kākāpo (*Strigops habroptila*), reveal catastrophic population bottlenecks during the LGM. However, it is unclear how migrant species, like the Banded Dotterel responded to the LGM’s climatic perturbation given that this species consists of subpopulations that differ in seasonal movements. 

-   MEDIA REQUEST @mihai: Here it would be great if you could place this schematic figure here: <https://drive.google.com/file/d/1nJg4Dh3K5ritQ26SWZEpr86XBDWGE4gW>, as you'll see, I've embedded the caption into the top-right of the figure.

Ancient fluxes in global climate have likely given rise to the phenotypic diversity of migration seen in Banded Dotterels today whereby coastal breeders typically remain resident year-round while alpine breeders at the base of present-day glaciers migrate several thousands of kilometres overseas. This contrast in migratory behaviour is bizarre given that alpine nesting sites are only 100 km from coastal nesting sites – presenting an intriguing circumstance to examine the evolutionary trade-offs of varying seasonal movements and the mechanistic pathways for balancing selection of alternative migratory phenotypes. Present-day climate change has sparked rapid changes in avian migratory schedules. In south-east Australia (the main destination for migrant Banded Dotterels), average temperatures have increased steadily since 1960. Throughout this period, the arrival date of Banded Dotterels has increasingly delayed, whereas other species arriving from the Arctic have advanced their arrival date. The delayed arrival of Banded Dotterels poses a curious contrast to their boreal counterparts – providing a golden opportunity to identify alternate evolutionary mechanisms of phenotypic adaptation to climate change.

-   MEDIA REQUEST @mihai: Here it would be great if you could place this schematic figure here: <https://drive.google.com/file/d/1cbDnaMxf2i7RpOVaVz3cpywYjIeUVO36>, as you'll see, I've embedded the caption into the right of the figure.



The Diademed Sandpiper Plover (*Phegornis mitchellii*, hereafter "DSP") is a charismatic shorebird inhabiting the high Andes of South America. Despite the species' iconic status for ecotourists and ornithologists worldwide, surprisingly little is known about the annual movements of DSP throughout the continent. Current understanding of DSP life history suggests that breeding activities are limited to high elevation (\>2500 m) brackish or freshwater wetlands often fed by thermal springs. Although these wetlands experience freezing temperatures, high winds, and/or snowfall over the winter, no DSP have been observed at lower elevations on the Andean Pacific slope, suggesting that DSP remain sedentary at high elevation wetlands or migrate to unidentified regions of the continent. To solve this ornithological mystery, our project uses state-of-the-art animal tracking technology at two breeding sites spanning the central core and southern limit of the species' range: Lagunas de Vilama, Argentina, and the El Yeso Valley, Chile.

-   MEDIA REQUEST @mihai: Here it would be great if you could place two photos of the study sites side by side. They are on the Google drive (Lagunas de Vilama: <https://drive.google.com/file/d/1EuCJHh_4qbnohwWUefTRw9fU_8D1o4b3>, El Yeso Valley: <https://drive.google.com/file/d/1fVZvdHEdtkh_ea5ImdvL10frlsJC3GdQ>). Captions would be "Study sites for tag deployments on Diademed Sandpiper-Plovers. Lagunas de Vilama, Argentina (left, photo by Bruce Lyon), and El Yeso Valley, Chile (right)."

DSP breed in small and geographically isolated populations where wetland habitat requirements are appropriate for nesting and tending precocial broods -- demographical traits that make the species vulnerable to local extinctions. Climate change and anthropogenic pressures from livestock overgrazing and mining likely pose serious threats to breeding populations through shifts in hydrological regimes, desiccation, and disturbance. The ca. 5 month-long breeding season of DSP suggests that individuals initiate several sequential breeding attempts, however the movements of breeding individuals between nesting attempts is unknown. Identifying connectivity among breeding populations through the use of remote tracking technology will provide useful insights about source-sink dynamics, gene-flow, and the potential for local population recovery via immigration. The DSP is classified as Near Threatened (IUCN Red List Category "C2a(i)") due to its small population size of 1500--7000 individuals, decreasing population trend, and restricted range. Most of the species' breeding range is severely challenging to access due to limited infrastructure and demanding terrain, making ground-based monitoring of DSP near impossible. Fortunately, recent advances in nano-tagging technology have made it possible to safely investigate the detailed movements of small-bodied birds anywhere on the planet -- offering us the opportunity to fill in crucial knowledge gaps of the enigmatic DSP throughout the Andes.

-   MEDIA REQUEST @mihai: Here it would be great if you could place the photo of my releasing a tagged DSP (<https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-wdZHnwHQNWgzpvvvPi4fHCyJwKFMAPG>)

To track the annual movements of DSP, our project utilizes two tagging technologies on breeding individuals: i) Argos PTT satellite tags (Microwave Telemetry, Inc.) and ii) Druid GPS tags (Druid Technology Co., Ltd.). PTT satellite tags offer the major advantage of real-time online remote tracking of tagged individuals anywhere on the planet via the Argos satellite network, however satellite telemetry offers coarse spatial resolution (ca. 250m). Alternatively, GPS tags provide highly accurate data at ca. 3m but archive movement data until the tagged individual is within range of a solar-charged 'HUB' receiving station or smartphone with App. Both types tags weigh 1.7g and are solar-powered to sustain multiple years of data collection. Given that there is little known about breeding site fidelity of DSP, our use of PTT tags ensures that we collect information on large-scale movements of dispersal or migration by individuals that do not necessarily return to the deployment location. Alternatively, GPS tags collect highly precise movement data of individuals, but require that tagged individuals exhibit site fidelity and return to deployment locations where the 'HUB' receiving units are stationed to download archived data.

-   MEDIA REQUEST @mihai: Here it would be great if you could put a 2x2 grid of the following four pieces of media: top-left = <https://drive.google.com/file/d/1okLv0YqnFCuri5p6KMEgVvYM2NIp5ile> (caption: Termas del Plomo at the end of the El Yeso Valley), top-right = <https://drive.google.com/file/d/174ZHPUyj745LA2jIPhvLk0Ib5W79S1x4> (caption: Sentinel-2 satellite imagery of the Termas del Plomo in summer and in winter), bottom-left = <https://drive.google.com/file/d/1t6AD1weMm2jTjF0UfuXlg4GIYhCcxvig> (caption: ultra high resolution (\~15cm<sup>2</sup> pixel) satellite image of the Termas del Plomo), bottom-right = <https://drive.google.com/file/d/1xc31z6_AQ0hEO0toQDl5k6vHJX-BoMZm> (caption: animated tracks of PTT-tagged DSP breeding and wintering in El Yeso Valley).

Data collection during the austral winter is still ongoing, but preliminary evidence suggests that DSP do not exhibit concerted latitudinal or elevational migrations. Rather, DSP remain sedentary around thermal springs used during the breeding season, or move to adjacent thermal springs up to 150 km away -- presumably where local carrying capacity allows for over-wintering. Ultra high resolution satellite imagery (\~15cm<sup>2</sup> pixels) confirms that the thermal springs remain snow free despite \>3m of snow cover. Our results demonstrate that DSP are a unique 'extremophilic' shorebird whose range may be restricted, in part, by geothermal activity. Our future work aims to document the social cohesion and foraging ecology of DSP flocks residing at these winter oases.

*project lead*: Dr. Luke Eberhart-Hertel (eventually add a hyperlink to my personal page in the website), contact: <a href= "mailto:luke.eberhart@bi.mpg.de">luke.eberhart[at]bi.mpg.de</a>

-   MEDIA REQUEST @mihai: Here it would be great if you could add this photo: <https://drive.google.com/file/d/1AG2DAKn9avx9bAhYtEehuUjrrf0PqSoZ> (caption: field team at the El Yeso Valley, Chile)

## Collaborators

Fernando Diaz<sup>1</sup>, Alejandro Pietrek<sup>2</sup>, Cristian Pinto<sup>1</sup>, Andrea Contreras-Sepúlveda<sup>1</sup>, Fabrice Schmitt<sup>1</sup>, Erik Sandvig<sup>1</sup>, Jim Johnson<sup>3</sup>, Bruce Lyon<sup>2</sup>

<sup>1</sup>Red de Observadores de Aves y Vida Silvestre de Chile, Santiago, Chile; <sup>2</sup>University of California, Santa Cruz, California, USA; <sup>2</sup>United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Anchorage, Alaska, USA

MEDIA REQUEST @mihai: Here it would be great if you could add the logos for ROC (<https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Y5bapSkylYkvaSFp7qN3vrVlvF6PdbLP>) and UCSC (<https://drive.google.com/file/d/15GH7Nn7Lb-hvwx6_4BfhHV55wOwuSa3q>)

## Publications
